$Corresponding authors: [adriano.koshiyama.15, e.kazim, p.treleaven]@ucl.ac.uk 
*Listed authors are those who contributed substantive ideas and/or work to this report. Contributions include writing, 
research, and/or review for one or more sections , and/or via ongoing discussions. As such, except for the corresponding 
authors, inclusion as author does not imply endorsement of all aspects of the report; the other authors are listed roughly in 
order of contribution. The list of authors may change, subject to approval from their respective organizations.  
Towards Algorithm Auditing  
A Survey on Managing Legal, Ethical and Technological Risks of AI, ML and Associated Algorithms* 
 
 
Adriano Koshiyama1,2,$, Emre Kazim1,2,$, Philip Treleaven1,$, Pete Rai3, Lukasz Szpruch4,5,                   
Giles Pavey1,6,7, Ghazi Ahamat8, Franziska Leutner1,9,10, Randy Goebel11, Andrew Knight12,               
Janet Adams13, Christina Hitrova14, Jeremy Barnett1,15,16, Parashkev Nachev1, David Barber1, Tomas 
Chamorro-Premuzic1,17,18, Konstantin Klemmer19, Miro Gregorovic20,  Shakeel Khan21,22, and    
Elizabeth Lomas1 
 
 
1University College London, 2Holistic AI, 3Cisco Systems, 4University of Edinburgh, 5The Alan Turing 
Institute, 6Unilever, 7University of Oxford, 8Centre For Data Ethics and Innovation, 9HireVue, 
10Goldsmiths University of London, 11University of Alberta, 12Royal Institution of Chartered 
Surveyors, 13Ainstein AI TM, 14Technical University of Munich, 15St Pauls Chambers, 16Resilience 
Partners, 17Columbia University, 18ManpowerGroup, 19University of Warwick,                                     
20London Stock Exchange, 21UK HMRC, 22ValidateAI 
 
 
Abstract 
Business reliance on algorithms are becoming ubiquitous, and companies are increasingly concerned 
about their algorithms causing major financial or reputational damage. High-profile cases  include 
VW’s Dieselgate scandal with fines worth of $34.69B, Knight Capital’s bankruptcy (~$450M) by a glitch 
in its algorithmic t rading system, and Amazon’s AI recruiting tool being scrap ped after showing bias 
against women.  In response, governments are legislatin g and imposing bans,  regulators fining 
companies, and the Judiciary discussing potentially making algorithms artificial “persons” in Law.  
 
Soon there will be ‘billions’ of algorithms making dec isions with minimal human intervention; from 
autonomous vehicles and finance, to medical treatment, employment, and legal decisions. Indeed, 
scaling to problems beyond the human is a major point of using such algorithms in the first place . As 
with Financial Audit, governments, business and society will require Algorithm Audit; formal assurance 
that algorithms a re legal, ethical and safe. A new industry is envisaged: Auditing and Assurance of 
Algorithms (cf. Data privacy), with the remit to professionalize and industrialize AI, ML and associated 
algorithms.  
 
The stakeholders range from those working on policy and regulation, to industry practitioners and 
developers. We also anticipate the nature and scope of the auditing levels and framework presented 
will inform those interested in systems of governance and compliance to regulation/standards. Our 
goal in this paper is to survey the key areas necessary to perform auditing and assurance, and instigate 
the debate in this novel area of research and practice. 
  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
2 
 
1. Introduction 
With the rise of Artificial Intelligence (AI), legal, ethical and safety implications of its use are becoming 
increasingly pivotal in business and society. We are currently entering a new phase of the ‘digital 
revolution’ in which privacy, acc ountability, fairness, and safety are becoming priority research and 
debate agendas for engineering and the social sciences (Treleaven et al., 2019; Brundage et al., 2020). 
 
Like the ‘Big Data’ wave, this new phase of algorithmic decision making and evaluation (‘Big Algo’) can 
be paraphrased using the 5V’s methodology: 
 
• Volume: as resources and know-how proliferate, soon there will be ‘billions’ of algorithms; 
• Velocity: algorithms making real-time decision with minimal human intervention; 
• Variety: from autonomous vehicles to medical treatment, employment, finance, etc.; 
• Veracity: reliability, legality, fairness, accuracy, and regulatory compliance as critical features; 
• Value: new services, sources of revenue, cost-savings, and industries will be established. 
 
Whilst the last decade (the 10s) the focus was on ‘Data Protection’, the shift now is towards ‘Algorithm 
Conduct’. As a result, new technologies, procedures and standards will be needed to ensure that ‘Big 
Algo’ is an opportunity and not a threat to governments, business and society. 
 
Algorithm Auditing is the research and practice of assessing, mitigating, and assuring an algorithm ’s 
safety, legality, and ethics . This area encompasses current research in areas such as  AI Fairness, 
Explainability, Rob ustness, Privacy, as well as matured topics of Data ethics, management and 
stewardship.  As with Financial Audit, eventually governments, business and society will require 
Algorithm Audit, i.e., the formal assurance that algorithms a re legal, ethical and safe. In a snapshot, 
Figure 1 outlines the dimensions and examples of activities that are part of Algorithm Auditing. We 
define each one below. 
 
• Development: the process of developing and documenting an algorithmic system. 
• Assessment: the process of evaluating the algorithm behaviour and capacities. 
• Mitigation: the process of servicing or 
improving an algorithm outcome. 
• Assurance: the process of declaring that a 
system conforms to predetermined 
standards, practices or regulations.  
 
A new industry is envisaged: Auditing and Assurance 
of Algorithms and Data, with the remit to 
professionalize and industrialize AI, ML and 
associated algorithms. Our goal with this paper is to 
instigate the debate in this novel area of Algorithm 
Audit. The following  sections present the key 
components that cover the Algorithm Audit research 
and practice, namely: algorithms, verticals of 
auditing, mitigation strategy and assurance. 
2. Key Components of Algorithm Auditing 
In this section we describe the key parts encompassing Algorithm Auditing, namely: the algorithm as 
the centerpiece of the process; the main verticals of auditing; ways to perform  auditing and what 
happens subsenquently; and finally, the possible outcome of auditing, namely, algorithm assurance 
processes. 
2.1 Object of Audit: Algorithms  
An algorithm is a finite sequence of well-defined, computer-implementable instructions, typically to 
solve a class of problems or to perform a computation. The key constituents of an algorithm are: 
 
 
Figure 1. Dimensions and examples of activities that 
are part of algorithm auditing. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
3 
• Data: input, output, and simulation environment;  
• Model: objective function, formulation, parameters and hyperparameters; and 
• Development: design, documentation, building process and infra-structure, and open-source 
libraries.  
 
In the 1980-1990s, Expert Systems (Giarratano and Riley, 1998)  were mainly in vogue and the  main 
concern in relation to quality assurance was restricted to Development and Model (Rushby, 1988). 
We should also mention that the focus during that period was more on accuracy  and computational 
cost. Since the 00s, the paradigm has shifted, with now most of the industrial applications of AI relying 
on Machine Learning (Hastie et al., 2009; Sutton and Barto, 2018). This has added a new source of risk, 
namely Data (with model and data interacting in a much more complex way than before) , to the 
quality assurance process ; discussions are now broadly around bias and discrimin ation, 
interpretability and explainability, privacy,  with a  reduced focus o n performance and resilience of 
early systems.  
2.2 What to Audit: Verticals of Algorithm Auditing 
Regardless of the algorithm, broadly speaking, there are five stages of Development (see Table 1): 
 
I. Data and Task Setup : collecting, storing, extracting,  normalising, transforming, and loading 
data. Ensuring that the  data pipelines are well -structured, and the task (regression, 
classification, etc.) has been well -specified and designed.  Ensuring that data and software 
artifacts are well documented and preserved. 
II. Feature pre-processing: selecting, enriching, transforming, and engineering a feature space.  
III. Model selection: running model cross-validation, optimization, and comparison. 
IV. Post-processing and Reporting: adding thresholds, auxiliary tools and feedback mechanisms 
to improve interpretability, presenting the results to key stakeholders, evaluating the impact 
of the algorithmic system to the business. 
V. Productionizing and Deploying : passing through several review processes, from IT to 
Business, and putting in place monitoring and delivery interfaces. Maintaining an appropriate 
record of in-field results and feedback. 
 
Although these stages appear static and self-containing, in practice they interact in a dynamic fashion, 
not following a linear progression but a series of loops, particularly in between Pre/Post-processing.  
 
Table 1. Interrelation between development stage and auditing verticals. 
 
 
 
In Table 1 we also list how each stage interacts with four keys verticals: 
• Privacy: quality of a system to mitigate personal or critical data leakage.  
• Fairness: quality of a system to avoid unfair treatment of individuals or organizations.  
• Explainability: quality of a system to provide decisions or suggestions that can be understood 
by their users and developers. 
• Robustness: quality of a system to be safe, not vulnerable to tampering. 
 
In a similar fash ion to  the stages, each vertical appears to be self-contained, but these are also 
interrelated. Though the research on each vertical is mostly conducted in silos, there is a growing 
 
 
Stage 
 
Explainability Robustness Fairness Privacy 
Data and      
Task Setup 
Data collection 
and labelling Data accuracy  Population 
balance DPIA 
Feature pre-
processing 
Dictionary of 
variables 
Feature 
engineering 
Fair 
representations 
Data 
minimisation 
Model selection Model 
complexity 
Model 
validation 
Fairness 
constraints 
Differential 
privacy 
Post-processing 
and Reporting Auxiliary tools Adversarial 
testing 
Bias metrics 
assessment Model inversion 
Productionizing 
and Deploying 
Interface and 
documentation 
Concept drift 
detection and 
continuous 
integration 
Real-time 
monitoring of 
bias metrics 
Rate-limiting 
and user’s 
queries 
management 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
4 
reckoning from the scientific and industry community of the Trade-offs and Interactions between 
them. Accuracy, a component of robustness, may need to be traded for lowering any existing outcome 
metric of bias; making the model more explainable may affect some of the system performance and 
privacy; Improving privacy may affect ways to  assess adverse impact of algorithmic systems; a nd so 
on. Optimisation of these features and tradeoffs will depend on multiple factors, notably the use case 
domain, the regulatory jurisdiction, and the risk appetite and values of the organization implementing 
the algorithm. 
2.3 Ways to Audit: Levels of Access for Auditing 
There are different levels of access t hat an auditor has during its investigation of an algorithm (see 
Table 3). In the scientific literature and technical reports, the commonplace is to categ orize the 
knowledge about the system in two extremes: ‘White -box’ and ‘Black -box’. In fact, the spectr um 
regarding the knowledge of a system is more of  a continuum of  ‘shades of grey’ than this simple 
dichotomy. This additional nuance allows for a richer e xploration of the technologies available for 
assessment and mitigation, as well as the right level of disclosure that a certain business feels 
comfortable to engage.  
 
Hence, we can identify seven levels of access that an auditor can have of a system. It ranges from the 
highest level ‘White-box’ where all the details encompassing the model are disclosed to  the lowest 
level to ‘Process-access’ where only indirect observat ion of a system can be made. The levels in 
between are set by limiting the access to the components behind the learning process (e.g. knowledge 
of the objective function, model architecture, input data, etc.). Level 7 contains all the assessment, 
monitoring, and mitigation strategies of lower levels, with the report getting less detailed and 
inaccurate as levels decreases. Therefore, analysis and techniques requiring Level 7 cannot be used at 
Level 6 without proper assumptions and acceptable levels of inaccuracy.  
2.4 After Audit: Mitigation Strategies 
Given the feedback received as output of the audit interventions can be made to improve the systems 
outcome across the key verticals  and stages. The more access to the algorithmic system, the more 
targeted, technical, diverse  and effective will be the mitigation strategy employed. Table 2 lists 
possible interventions when a ‘White-box’ level is considered. When the access available is lower than 
‘White-box’, then access to some stages and procedures are omitt ed from this table (e.g. Data and 
Task setup or Productionizing and Deploying). 
 
Table 2. Interrelation between development stage and mitigation strategies for ‘White-box’ access level. 
 
2.5 Outcome of Audit: Assurance Processes 
The broader outcome of an auditing process is to improve confidence or ensure trust of the underlying 
system and then to cap ture that in some certification process . After assessing the system,  and 
implementing mitigation strategies, the auditing process assesses whether the system conforms to 
regulatory, governance and ethical standards. Providing assurance, therefore, needs to be understood 
through different dimensions and steps needs to be taken so that the algorithm can be shown to be 
trustworthy. Below we list key points that embody the assurance process: 
 
 
Stage 
 
Explainability Robustness Fairness Privacy 
Data and      
Task Setup 
Dictionary of variables 
and dataset sheets 
Collecting targeted 
data, reframing loss 
function 
Alternative data 
sources Anonymisation 
Feature pre-
processing 
Avoiding excessive 
feature engineering Feature Squeezing Synthetic data 
generation 
Dimensionality 
Reduction 
Model selection By-design 
interpretable models Adversarial Training Counterfactual 
Fairness 
Federated 
Learning 
Post-processing 
and Reporting LIME, SHAP 
High Confidence 
Predictions and 
Confidence Intervals 
Calibrated Odds Model Inversion 
Mitigation 
Productionizing 
and Deploying Recourse interface ‘Circuit-breaking’ Monitoring 
panels 
Rate-limiting and 
user’s queries 
management 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
5 
• General and sector -specific assurance: broad national regulation and s tandards (provided 
agents such as NIST, UK -ICO, EU, etc.) with sector specific ones , such as in financial services 
(e.g. SEC, FCA, etc.), health (e.g. NIH, NHS, etc.), real estate (e.g. RICS, IVS, USPAP), etc. 
• Governance: from two aspects, namely technical assessments (robustness, privacy, etc.) and 
impact (risk, compliance, etc.) assessments.  
• Unknown Risks:  discussing risk schemes and highlight ing ‘red teaming’, which is used to 
mitigate unknown risks.  
• Monitoring Interfaces: outlining risk assessments an d the use of ‘traffic -light’ user friendly 
monitoring interfaces. 
• Certification: the numerous ways in which certificatio n may occur, such as certification of a 
system or AI engineers, etc.  
• Insurance: a subsequent service to emerge as a result of assurance maturing. 
Regulators face a growing challenge in both supervising the use of these algorithms amongst the 
sector which they oversee and the use of algorithms in their own regulatory process via RegTech and 
SupTech. There are some other ‘soft’ aspects, rel ated to the governance structure underpinning the 
development. These are related to defining an algorithm's goals (what does it aim to achieve?), how 
it serves those it is making decisions about. These could compose a statement of intention whereby 
the designer sets out a position statement in advance indicating what it is that the algo is supposed to 
do. This could facilitate to judge whether the algo has performed as it was intended. 
 
3. Algorithms 
For completeness, this section unpacks algorithms across thr ee domains: Computational Statistics 
(e.g. Monte Carlo methods), AI and ML (e.g. Artificial Neural Networks), and Comple x Systems (e.g. 
Agent-Based systems). See below. While there may be some debate over the terminology, we find the 
classification helpful to distinguish between relatively well -established methods and more cutting -
edge technologies.  
 
• Computational Statistics - computationally intensive statistical methods. 
• Complex Systems - systems with many interacting components whose aggregate activity is 
nonlinear and typically exhibit hierarchical self-organization under selective pressures. 
• AI Algorithms - mimicking a form of learning, reasoning, knowledge, and decision-making 
o Knowledge or rule-based systems 
o Evolutionary algorithms 
o Machine learning 
3.1 Computational Statistics 
Computational Statistics models refers to computationally intensive statistical met hods including 
Resampling methods (e.g., Bootstrap and Cross -Validation), Monte Carlo methods, Kernel Density 
estimation and other Semi and Non-Parametric Statistical methods, and Generalized Additive Models 
(Efron and Hastie, 2016; Wood, 2017). Examples include:  
a) Resampling methods - a variety of methods for doing one of the following: i) estimating the 
precision of sample statistics using subsets o f data (e.g. jack-knifing) or drawn randomly from a 
set of data points (e.g. bootstrapping); ii) exchangin g labels on data points when performing 
significance tests (e.g. permutation tests) ; iii) validating models by using random subsets ( e.g. 
repeated cross-validation);  
b) Monte Carlo methods  - a broad class of computational algorithms that rely on repeated 
random sampling to approximate integrals, particularly used to compute expected values (e.g. 
options payoff) including those meant for inference and e stimation (e.g., Bayesian estimation, 
simulated method of moments);  
c) Kernel Density estimation  - are a set of methods used to approximate multivariate density 
functions from a set of datapoints; it is largely applied to generate smooth functions, reduce  
outlier effects and improve joint density estimations, sampling, and to derive non-linear fits;  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
6 
d) Generalized Additive Models – a large class of nonlinear models widely used for inference and 
predictive modelling (e.g. time series forecasting, curve-fitting, etc.);  
e) Regularisation Methods – Regularisation methods are increasingly used as an alternative to 
traditional hypothesis testing and criteria -based methods, for allowing better quality forecasts 
with a large number of features.  
3.2 Complex Systems 
A complex system is any system featuring  a large number of interacting components (e.g. agents, 
processes, etc.) whose aggregate activity is nonlinear (not derivable from the summations of the 
activity of individual components) and typically exhibit hierarc hical self-organization under selective 
pressures (Taylor, 2014; Barabási, 2016). Examples include:  
a) Cellular automata - a collection of cells arranged in a grid, such that each cell changes state as 
a function of time according to a defined set of rule s that includes the states of neighbour ing 
cells;  
b) Agent-based models  - a class of computational models for simulating the actions and 
interactions of autonomous agents (individual or collective entities such as organizations or 
groups) with a view to assessing their effects on the system as a whole;  
c) Network-based models - a complex network is a graph (network) with non -trivial topological 
features - features that do not occur in simple networks such as lattices or random graphs but 
often occur in graphs modelling of real systems; and  
d) Multi-Agent systems – this subarea focus on formulating cooperative-competitive policies to 
a multitude of agents with the aim to achieve a given goal; this topic has significant overlap with 
Reinforcement Learning and Agent-based models. 
3.3 AI and Machine Learning 
There are broadly two classes of AI algorithms, which might be termed: static algorithms – traditional 
programs that perform a fixed sequence of actions; and dynamic algorithms – that embody machine 
learning and evolve. It is these latter ‘intelligent’ algorithms that present complex technical challenges 
for testing and verification, which will impact and demand further regulation. 
 
This AI continuum of epistemological models spans three main communities:  
a) Knowledge-based or heuristic algorithms (e.g. rule-based) - where knowledge is explicitly 
represented as ontologies or IF -THEN rules rather than implicitly via code  (Giarratano and 
Riley, 1998); 
b) Evolutionary or metaheuristics algorithms - a family of algorithms for global optimization 
inspired by biological evolution, using population -based trial and error problem solvers with 
a metaheuristic or stochastic optimization character (e.g. G enetic Algorithms, Genetic 
Programming, etc.) (Poli et al., 2008; Brownlee, 2011); and  
c) Machine Learning algorithms - a type of AI program with the ability to learn without explicit 
programming, and can change when exposed to new data; mainly comprising Supervised (e.g. 
Support Vector Machines, Random Forest, etc.), Unsupervised (e.g. K-Means, Independent 
Component Analysis, etc.), and Reinforcement Learning  (e.g. Q -Learning, Temporal 
Differences, Gradient Policy Search, etc.) (Hastie et al., 2009; Sutton and Barto, 2018). Russell 
and Norvig (2016) provide an in-depth view of different aspects of AI.  
 
ML firstly subdivides into: 
▪ Supervised learning : Given a  set of inputs/independent variables/predictors  𝐱 and 
outputs/dependent variables/targets 𝐲, the goal is to learn a function 𝑓(𝐱) that approximates 
𝐲. This is accom plished by supervising 𝑓(𝐱), that is, providing it  with examples (𝐱1, 𝐲1), …, 
(𝐱n, 𝐲𝑛) and feedback whenever it makes mistakes or accurate predictions.  
▪ Unsupervised learning: Given several objects/samples 𝐱1, … , 𝐱n, the goal is to learn a hidden 
map ℎ(𝐱) that can uncover a hidden structure in the data. This hidden map can be used to 
‘compress’ 𝐱 (aka dimensionality reduction) or to assign to every 𝐱i a group 𝑐𝑘 (aka clustering 
or topic modelling). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
7 
▪ Reinforcement learning : Given an environment formed by several states 𝒔1, 𝒔2, … , 𝒔𝑛, an 
agent, and a reward function, the goal is to learn a policy 𝜋 that will guide an agent actions 
𝒂1, 𝒂2, … , 𝒂𝑘 through the state space so as to maximize occasional rewards.  
 
Figure 2 provides an illustration of 
these key learning paradigms. 
Suppose a database of financial 
reports is available. If some of them 
have been historically labelled as 
positive and negative, we can 
leverage this to automatically tag 
future d ocuments. This can be 
accomplished by training a Learner in 
a Supervised fashion. If these 
documents were unstructured, and 
spotting relations or topics is the goal 
(political events, economic data, etc.), 
a Learner trained in an Unsupervised 
manner can he lp uncover these 
hidden structures. Also, these documents can characterise the current state of the capital markets. 
Using that, a Learner can decide which actions should be taken in order to maximize profits, hedge 
against certain risks, etc. By interacting and gaining feedback from the environment, the Learner can 
Reinforce some behaviours so to avoid future losses or inaccurate decisions. 
 
In addition to that, Deep Learning, Adversarial Learning, Transfer and Meta Learning are advanced 
new techniques enhancing Supervised, Unsupervised and Reinforcement learning. They are not only 
powering new solutions and applications (e.g. driverless vehicles, smart speakers, etc.) but they are 
making the resolution of previous problems cheaper, faster and more scalable.  They tend also to be 
opaquer, making the issue of auditing and assurance more challenging. The second subdivision is: 
▪ Deep Learning - deep learning algorithms attempt to model high-level abstractions in data by 
using multiple processing layers, with complex structures or otherwise, composed of multiple 
non-linear transformations. Hence, the mapping function we are attempting to learn can be 
broken down into several compositional operations 𝑓(𝐱) = 𝑓1 ∘  𝑓2 ∘ 𝑓3 ∘ … ∘ 𝑓𝑛(𝐱). Various 
deep learnin g architectures such as deep ne ural networks, convolutional deep neural 
networks, deep belief networks and recurrent neural networks have been applied to fields 
like computer vision, automatic speech recognition, natural language processing, audio 
recognition and bioinformatics where th ey have been shown to produce state -of-the-art 
results on various tasks (Goodfellow, et al., 2016; Chollet, 2017). 
▪ Adversarial Learning - adversarial machine learning is a technique employed in the field of 
machine learning w hich attempts to ‘fool’ models through malicious input. More formally, 
assume a given input 𝐱 associated to a label 𝐜 and a machine learning model 𝑓 such that 
𝑓(𝐱) = 𝐜, that is, 𝑓 can perfectly classify 𝐱. We consider 𝐱∗ an adversarial example if  𝐱∗ is 
indistinguishable from 𝐱 and 𝑓(𝐱) ≠ 𝐜. Since they are automatically crafted, these adversarial 
examples tend to be misclassified more often than is true of examples  which are perturbed 
by noise (Szegedy, 2013; Kurakin et al., 2016). Adversarial examples can be introduced during 
the training of models, making them more robust to attacks from adversarial agents . Typical 
applications involve increasing robustness in neu ral networks, spam filtering, information 
security applications, etc. (Huang et al., 2011). 
▪ Transfer/Meta Learning – these two learning paradigms are tightly connected, as their main 
goal is to encapsulate knowledge learned across many tasks and transfer i t to new, unseen 
ones. Knowledge transfer can help speed up training and preven t overfitting and can 
therefore improve the obtainable final performance. In Transfer Learning, knowledge is 
 
Figure 2: Main learning paradigms of Machine Learning. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
8 
transferred from a trained model (or a set thereof) to a new model b y encouraging the new 
model to have similar parameters. The trained model(s) from which knowledge is transferred 
is not trained with this transfer in mind, and hence the task it was trained on must be very 
general for it to encode useful knowledge with res pect to other tasks. In Meta Learning the 
learning method (learning rule, initialization, architecture etc.) is abstracted and shared across 
tasks, and meta -learned explicitly with transfer in mind, such that the learning method 
generalises to an unseen ta sk. Concretely, often in Transfer learning a pre -trained model is 
moved to a new task (Devlin et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019), whilst in Meta learning a pre-
trained optimizer is transferred across problems (Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Finn et al., 2017; 
Flennerhag et al., 2018). In both cases, the usual approach is to learn a Deep Neural Network 
that can be reused later, usually by stripping some of its terminal layers and creating an 
encoder-decoder to match the input and output for a task.  
  
4. Main Verticals of Algorithm Auditing 
In Computer Science, there is a growing engineering expertise overlapping with the Digital Ethics space 
(Floridi, 2018). Issues of explainability, fairness, privacy, governance, and robustness are now popular 
research themes among AI researchers – an area that is coming under the umbrella of “Trustworthy 
AI” (Brundage et al., 2020). From an engineering point of view, we believe that the most mature and 
impactful criteria are:  
• Performance and Robustness: systems should be safe and secure, not vulnerable to 
tampering or compromising of the data they are trained on. 
• Bias and Discrimination: systems should avoid unfair treatment of individuals or groups.  
• Interpretability and Explainability: systems should provide decisions or suggestions that can 
be understood by their users, developers and regulators. 
• Algorithm Privacy: systems should be trained following data minimization principles as well 
as adopt privacy-enhancing techniques to mitigate personal or critical data leakage.  
 
The next subsection will deal with each one of these criteria. 
4.1 Performance and Robustness 
Performance and Robustness as a technical concept is closely linked to the principle of prevention of 
harm (EU-HLEG, 2019). Systems should neither cause nor exacerbate harm or otherwise adversely 
affect human beings. This entails the protection of h uman dignity as well as  mental and physical 
integrity. Preventing harm can also entail consideration of the natural environment and of the living 
world. Most of the legal basis is established by an interaction between Regulatory Agencies, 
Professional Associations and Industry Trade Groups, where standards, rules and code of conducts are 
created: 
• Financial algorithms: SEC, FCA, FSB, BBA, BIS 
• Power systems: FERC, IEEE 
• Electrical appliances: NIST, Nat Fire Protection Association, State Legislation 
 
Figure 3: Traditional ML versus Transfer Learning versus Meta Learning.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
9 
• Automotive sector: National Transportation Safety Board, Soc Auto Engineers 
• And many others. 
 
Algorithm Performance and  Robustness is characterized by how effectively an algorithm can be 
deemed as safe and secure, not vulnerable to tampering or compromising of the data they are trained 
on. We can rate an algorithm’s performance and robustness using four key criteria (EU-HLEG, 2019): 
▪ Resilience to attack and security:  AI systems, like all software systems, should be protected 
against vulnerabilities that can allow the m to be exploited by adversaries, such as data 
poisoning, model leakage or the infrastructure, both software and hardware. This concept is 
linked with the mathematical concept of Adversarial Robustness (Carlini et al., 2019), that is, 
how would the algorithm have performed in the worst-case scenario? (e.g. how the algorithm 
would react during the 2008 Financial Crisis?). Mathematically, this can be expressed as: 
 
Adversarial risk1: 𝔼(𝒙, 𝒚)~𝒑 [ max
𝛿∈Δ(𝑥)
𝐿(𝑦; 𝑓(𝑥 + 𝛿))] ≈ mean
(𝑥,𝑦)∈𝐷𝑣𝑎𝑙
[ max
𝛿∈Δ(𝑥)
𝐿(𝑦; 𝑓(𝑥 + 𝛿))] 
▪ Fallback plan and general safety : AI systems should have safeguards that enable a fallback 
plan in case of problems. Also, the level of safety mea sures required depends on the 
magnitude of the risk posed by an AI system. This notion is strongly associated with the 
technical concept of Formal Verification (Qin et al., 2019), which in broad terms means: does 
the algorithm attends the problem specifications and constraints? (e.g. respect physical laws). 
One way to express this mathematically is: 
Verification bound1: ℙ(𝐹(𝑥; 𝑓(𝑥)) ≤ 0) ≈  
#(𝐹(𝑥𝑛𝑜𝑚;𝑓(𝑥))≤0)
|𝑆𝑖𝑛(𝑥𝑛𝑜𝑚, 𝛿)|  
▪ Accuracy: pertains to an AI system’s ability to make correct judgements, for example to 
correctly classify information into the proper categories, or its ability to make correct  
predictions, recommendations, or decisions based on data or models. Accuracy as a gene ral 
concept can be quantified by estimating the Expected Generalization Performance (Arlot and 
Celisse, 2010), which means that in general the question of how well the algorithm works? Is 
asked (e.g. in 7 out of 10 cases, the algorithm makes the right decision). Typically, the Expected 
Generalization Performance can be expressed by the following formula: 
Expected Loss1: 𝔼(𝑥, 𝑦)~𝑝[𝐿(𝑦; 𝑓(𝑥))] ≈ mean
(𝑥,𝑦)∈𝐷𝑣𝑎𝑙
[𝐿(𝑦; 𝑓(𝑥))] 
▪ Reliability and Reproducibility: a reliable AI system is one that works properly with a range of 
inputs and in a range of situations, whilst reproducibility describes whether an AI experiment 
exhibits the same behaviour when repeated under the same conditions. This idea is tied with 
the software engineering concept of Continuous Integration (Meyer, 2014), that is, is the 
algorithm auditable? (e.g. reliably reproduce its decisions). 
4.2 Bias and Discrimination 
Fairness as an ideal has been present in different manifestos and charters throughout history, 
gradually amplifying its outreach across the population, being the most recent and overarching in the 
UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948). Most of the legal basis was developed after multiple 
public demonstrations, civil rights moveme nts, etc. and are in many situations set or uph eld at 
Constitutional levels. We can mention a few across different countries: US: Civil Rights Act (1957 and 
1964), Americans with Disability Act (1990); UK: Equal Pay Act (1970), Sex Discrimination Act (1975 ), 
 
1 𝐿: loss function; 𝔼: expectation operator; 𝑦: output variable; 𝑥: input variable; 𝑓(𝑥): algorithm 
prediction/decision; 𝑝: sampling distribution of (𝑥, 𝑦); 𝐷𝑣𝑎𝑙: holdout set of (𝑥, 𝑦); Δ(𝑥): set of feasible 
perturbations (𝛿) of 𝑥; 𝐹: specification mapping 𝑥 and 𝑓(𝑥) in a real number, if 𝐹(𝑥; 𝑓(𝑥)) ≤ 0 then, we say it 
is satisfied; 𝑆𝑖𝑛(𝑥𝑛𝑜𝑚,  𝛿): the set of all input 𝑥 that are at most 𝛿 distant from 𝑥𝑛𝑜𝑚 (𝑆𝑖𝑛(𝑥𝑛𝑜𝑚,  𝛿) =
{𝑥: ||𝑥 − 𝑥𝑛𝑜𝑚||∞ ≤ 𝛿}); ℙ: probability measure. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
10 
Race Relations Act (1976), Disability Discrimination Act (1995), Equality Act (2010) ; and th ose 
enshrined in the constitutions of France, German, B razil, and a many other countries.  Indeed, it is 
suffice to say that notions of fairness appeal to substan tive value claims rooted in differing 
philosophical approaches and traditions – as such there is often ambiguous interpretations of the 
word ‘fairness’. 
 
In AI  and ML  there are multiple sources of bias that explain how an automated decision -making 
process becomes unfair (EU-HLEG, 2019): 
 
• Tainted examples: any ML system keeps the bias existing in the old data caused by human  
and societal biases (e.g. recruitment).  
• Skewed sample: future observations confirm predictions made, which create a perverse , or 
self-justifying feedback loop (e.g. police record). 
• Limited features: features may be less informative or reliably collected for minority group(s). 
• Sample size disparity: training data coming from the minority group is much less than those 
coming from the majority group. 
• Proxies: even if protected attributes are not used for training a system, there can always be 
other proxies of the protected attribute (e.g. neighbourhood). 
 
To diagnose and mitigate bias in decision -making, we first need to differentiate between Individual 
and Group level fairness : (i) Individual: seeks for similar individuals to be treated similarly ; and (ii) 
Group: split a population into groups defined by protected attributes and seeks for some measure to 
be equal across g roups. There are multiple ways to translate these concepts mathematically 
(Chouldechova, 2016; Kleiberg et al., 2016; Corbett-Davies et al., 2017) and deciding which definition 
to use must be done in accordance with governance structures and on a case-by-case basis. Also, 
within Group fairness, it is possible to distinguish between the aim of Equality of Opportunity and 
Outcome. For example, using SAT score as a feature for predicting success in college:  
 
• Equality of Opportunity worldview says that the score correlates well with future success and 
there is a way to use the score to correctly compare the abilities of applicants. A mathematical 
definition that is often used is the Average Odds Difference (Bellamy et al., 2018): 
𝐴𝑂𝐷 =  1
2 [(𝐹𝑃𝑅𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝 𝐴 − 𝐹𝑃𝑅𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝 𝐵) + (𝑇𝑃𝑅𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝 𝐴 − 𝑇𝑃𝑅𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝 𝐵)] 
with 𝐹𝑃𝑅 and 𝑇𝑃𝑅 representing the false and true positive rates, respectively. The underscore group 
A and group B reflect the conditioning of 𝐹𝑃𝑅 and 𝑇𝑃𝑅 to a given subset of the population analysed 
(e.g. group A could represent young individuals, and group B adult individuals).  
 
• Equality of Outcome worldview says that the SAT sco re may contain structural biases so its 
distribution being different across groups should not be mistaken  for a difference in 
distribution in ability. Statistical Parity Difference (Bellamy et al., 2018) is generally the most 
adopted form to represent this idea symbolically: 
𝑆𝑃𝐷 = ℙ(𝑦̂ = 1 |𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝 𝐴)
ℙ(𝑦̂ = 1 |𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝 𝐵) ≈ 𝐹𝑟𝑒𝑞(𝑦̂ = 1 |𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝 𝐴)
𝐹𝑟𝑒𝑞(𝑦̂ = 1 |𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑝 𝐵)  
with 𝐹𝑟𝑒𝑞 representing the empirical frequency of positive/yes/etc. predictions 𝑦̂ made by the model.  
 
we can also list variations of both, like equal reliability (UK-CDEI, 2021). Calibration is also capable of 
perpetuating pre -existing biases.  It should be noticed that fairness could be interpreted radically 
different in different environments and different countries and henc e one deployment of a given 
algorithm may encounter several different fairness measurement barriers. Finally, it's perhaps worth 
noting somewhere that it's not mathematically possible to construct an algorithm that simultaneously 
satisfies all reasonable definitions of a "fair" or "unbiased" algorithm (Chouldechova, 2017). 
4.3 Interpretability and Explainability 
Being able to provide clear and meaningful explanations is crucial for building and maintaining users’ 
trust in automated decision-making systems (Longo et al., 2020). This means that processes need to 
be transparent, the capabilities and purpose of systems openly communicated, and decisions – to the 
extent possible – explainable to those directly and indirectly affected. Without such information, a 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
11 
decision cannot be duly contested (EU -HLEG, 2019). The ultimate user benefits from being able to 
contest decisions, seek redress, and learn through user -system interaction; the developer also 
benefits from a transparent system by being able to “debug” it, uncover unfair decisions and from 
knowledge discovery.  
 
Hence, the capabilities and purpose of algorithms should be openly communicated decisions 
explainable to those directly and indirectly affected timely and adapted to the expertise of the 
stakeholder concerned (e.g. layperson, regulator or researcher). In t he US, credit scoring has a well -
established right to explanation legislation via The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (1974). Credit 
agencies and data analysis firms such as FICO comply with this regulation by providing a list of reasons 
(generally at most four, per interpretation of regulations). From an AI standpoint, there are new 
regulations that gives the system’s user the right to know why a certain automated decision was taken 
in a certain form -- Right to an Explanation – EU General Data Protection Regulation (2016). 
 
In the context of AI and ML, Explainability and Interpretability are often used interchangeably. 
Algorithm Interpretability is about the extent to which a cause and effect can be observe d within a 
system, and the extent an observer is able  to predict what will happen, for a given set of input or 
algorithm parameters. Algorithm Explainability is the extent to which the internal mechanics of a ML 
(deep learning) system is explainable in hum an terms. In simple terms, Interpretability is about 
understanding the algorithm mechanics (without necessarily knowing why); Explainability is being able 
to explain what is happening in the algorithm. 
 
There are multiple forms to generate and provide expl anations based on an algorithmic decision -
making system. Figure 4 presents the types and levels of Explainability: model -specific and agnostic, 
global and local (Hall, 2019; Molnar, 2019). Below we unwrap these concepts, as well as outline some 
technical solutions: 
 
Model-specific (intrinsic): With model 
specific explainability, a model is designed 
and developed in such a way that it is fully 
transparent and explainable by design. In 
other words, an additional explainabili ty 
technique is not required to be  overlaid on 
the model in order to be able to fully explain 
its workings and outputs.  
 
Model-agnostic (post-facto): With model -
agnostic explainability, a mathematical 
technique is applied to the outputs of any 
algorithm i ncluding very complex and 
opaque m odels, in order to provide an 
interpretation of the decision drivers for 
those models.  
 
Global: this facet focuses on understanding the algorithm’s behaviour at a high/dataset/populational 
level. The typical user are rese archers and designer of algorithms , since they tend to be more 
interested with the general insights and knowledge discovery that the model produces, rather than 
specific individual cases.  
 
Local: this facet focuses on understanding the algorithm’s behaviour at a low/subset/individual level. 
The typical user of local explanations are individuals being targeted by an algorithm, as well as 
members of the judiciary and regulators trying to make a case about potential discrimination. 
 
It is important to note that the explainability requirements may be different for different regions and 
different use cases. This means that the same approach may not be applicable in all  contexts of  
deployment of a given algorithm. 
 
 
Figure 4: Types and levels of Algorithm Explainability. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
12 
4.4 Algorithm Privacy 
From the principles level, pri vacy is closely linked to the prin ciple of prevention of harm (EU -HLEG, 
2019): systems can cause or exacerbate adverse impacts due to asymmetries of power or information, 
such as between employers and employees, businesses and consumers or governments and citizens. 
Preventing harm demands bespoke data governance that covers the quality and integrity of the data 
used, its relevance considering the domain in which the algorithm will be deployed, its access 
protocols and the capability to process data in a man ner that protects privacy. It is possible to group 
these issues in two key areas: 
 
• Privacy and data protection: systems must guarantee privacy and data protection throughout 
a system’s entire lifecycle (EU, 2016; Hind et al., 2018). This includes the information initially 
provided by the user and the one generated about the user over the course of their interaction 
with the system. Finally, protocols governing data access should be put in place, outlining who 
can access data and under which circumstances (Butterworth, 2018). 
• Model inferences: the security of any system is measured with respect to the adversarial goals 
and capabilities that it is designed to defend against . In this sense, one needs to provide 
information about: (i) the level of access the attacker might have (‘black-box’ or ‘white-box’); 
(ii) where the attack might take place (inference or training);  and (iii) passive versus active 
attacks  (De Cristofaro, 2020).  
 
Therefore, the risk assessment of Algorithm Privacy can be disentangled in ‘data’, ‘algorithm’, and the 
interaction between both components.  Below we outline the key methods available to as sess risks 
coming from each of these elements: 
 
• Data: the standard procedure to assess risks in this vertical is the Data Protection Impact 
Assessment (Bieker et al., 2016) . This p rocedure has been legally formalized in many 
jurisdictions, such as in the EU, UK, Canada, California, Brazil, etc. In the UK, as shown in Figure 
14, a qualitative rating can be provided depending on the perceived level of data protection. 
Another v ector i s data poisoning ( Tan and Shokri, 2019), where an attacker maliciously 
manipulates the training data in order to affect the algorithm behavior. 
• Algorithm: the key attack vector in this component is inferring model parameters  and build 
‘knock-offs’ version of it. To assess vulnerability, the auditor could apply techniques that aim 
to extract an (near-)equivalent copy or steal some functionalities of  an algorithm (Ateniese 
et al., 2015; Tramèr et al., 2016; Orekondy et al., 2019). 
• Data-Algorithm intera ction: the attack vectors in this component are inferring about 
members of the population or about members of the training dataset  through interactions 
with the algorithm . Attacks such as statistical disclosure (Dwork and Naor, 2010) , model 
inversion (Fredrikson et al., 2015) , inferring class representatives (Hitaj et al., 2017) , 
membership and property inference (Shokri et al., 2017; Ganju et al., 2018; Melis et al., 2019) 
are different criteria that can be applied to an algorithm to assess levels of vulnerability. 
4.5 Interactions and Trade-off Analysis 
A vital area of exploration is the trade -off analysis between these 
verticals. As depicted by Figure 5, these verticals  are not 
independent of each other – they overlap and interact. For example, 
with debiasing procedures affecting the model performance, g lobal 
and local interpretation and, potentially, data minimization aspects. 
Having a clear understanding of what will be traded in consequence 
of improvements in one vertical is becoming less of  a technological 
concern, and gradually more a requirement acr oss a wide array of 
guidelines (EU-HLEG, 2019; ICO 2020; ICO-Turing, 2020). Above all, it 
presents the growing evidence that in the emerging area of 
Trustworthy AI hardly there is a solution only trade -offs to be 
managed. Though the practicalities of trade -off analysis demand 
context, nonetheless some general explorations, roadmaps and 
 
Figure 5: The overlaps between 
Algorithm Robustness, Fairness, 
Explainability and Privacy. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
13 
guidelines can be still be issued and performed. In what follows we explore some of these. 
 
Explainability vs Robustness (accuracy): One that has been extensively explored by different authors 
and organizations (Koshiyama et al., 2020; 
ICO-Turing, 2020)  is the  Interpretability vs 
Accuracy trade -off – sometimes also 
presented as Explainability vs Performance 
trade-off. Figure 6 shows a typical depiction 
that can be found in many documents and 
papers. Prima facie, that is, looking only at 
the model function forms  and training, the 
depiction is broadly accurate. However , 
such depiction is highly debatable in  the 
light of data science  practice, since it could 
be that a Linear model is the most accurate 
model, but due to massive pre -processing 
performed (e.g. nonlinear features, etc.) the 
explainability level has been drastically 
reduced.  
 
Fairness vs Robustness: another trade-off 
well-explored in the literature is the 
Fairness (in the form of algorithm bias) and 
Robustness (in the form of algorithm 
performance) (Feldman et al., 2015; 
Kleinberg et al., 2016; Zafar et al., 2019) . 
Figure 7 explores a typical chart ab out this 
trade-off. Every do t represent s an 
algorithm setup (parameters, 
hyperparameters, etc.); the work of an 
algorithm designer is to identify the 
acceptable boundaries of statistical bias 
and performance, for example by adopting 
metrics like Statistical Parity and Accuracy. 
These boundaries can be identified b y liaising with business and end users , and by analysing best 
practices, standards or regulations commonly adopted in the field of application. In the example 
depicted in Figure 7, the boundaries a re set for -0.1 and 0.1 for Bias (Statistical Parity), and the 
Minimum Acceptable Performance of 0.53. From that, we can draw the region of algorithm 
configurations (or even models) that dwells within such limits. In this case, only 3 configurations are 
feasible from a Fairness vs Robustness point-of-view. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Algorithm selection trade-offs:  
model-specific Interpretability vs Accuracy. 
Accuracy
Interpretability
low
low
high
high
Linear/Logistic
Regression
GBT/Random
Forest
Gaussian 
Processes
SVMs
LSTM/
MLP/
CNN
LASSO/
Ridge/Elastic
Decision Trees
k-NN Linear SVM/
L(Q)DA
Naïve Bayes
Stacking
Regressors
 
Figure 7: Algorithm selection trade-offs:  
Bias (Statistical Parity) vs Performance (Accuracy). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
14 
Explainability vs Privacy: prima facie the 
easier it is to interpret a model, the harder it 
is to conceal information or its judgement. 
Hence, in first sight, interpretability and 
privacy are negatively related. However, 
being a ble to explain a model ’s internal 
workings such as via Feature Importance 
charts can aid with Data Minimizatio n 
(Goldsteen et al., 2020) , a key pillar of 
Algorithm Privacy. Using Figure 8 as an 
example, if we set a threshold of 0.025 to the 
Feature Importa nce metric, we can reduce 
the number of variables being used from 20 to 
only 8. Knocking -off variables eas e the 
explanation of a model judgements and will 
also reinforce to the end-users that their 
information is used in an efficient manner. 
 
 
Fairness vs Explainability: improving explainability of a system as a means to achieve greater 
transparency of its use act s as a positive driver to uncover inherent bias and discrimination to all its 
users and designers – se for instance Sharma et al. (2019). Figures 9a and 9b present examples using 
feature importance charts to understand the key drivers for a mortgage applic ation processing 
algorithm. Figure 9a demonstrates that when we break down the feature importance chart per 
declared sex, we discover disparities in how the algorithm is making its judgement – even though we 
have not included this information as an input to the model. Loan amount and, particularly applicant 
income are significantly more relevant variables for female applicants than for male. We can perform 
a similar analysis, such as in Figure 9b, where a permutation importance method was used on 
Disparate Impact metric (male-female) to construct the feature importance chart.  We uncover that 
there are disparities, as perceived in Figure 9a, particularly with the loan purpose, type and applicant 
income.   
 
Interaction between all verticals: there are a few charts that can be crafted to display components of 
each vertical. Figure 10 displays one of such, where the key goal is to identify relevant variables and 
undertake data minimization. Relevant variables are defined as having a high impact in a n algorithm 
Performance (Accuracy) and low impact in an algorithm Bias (Average Odds Difference) – both can be 
estimated by permutation importance using each  as the loss metric . The variables J and K are key 
variables, meeting both criteria; the variables G and H could be eliminated since they do not affect 
 
Figure 8: Algorithm selection trade -offs: Explainability 
(Feature Importance) vs Privacy (Data minimization). 
 
Figure 9: (a) Feature Importance chart with the breakdown per male and female groups. (b) Explainability (Feature 
Importance) based on a Bias (Disparate Impact) metric. 
(a) (b) 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
15 
much the model performance . Having this 
global understanding of an algorithm 
behaviour will become an unprecedented 
component to build and enhance the 
trustworthiness of an algorithm. 
 
Two other interactions are worth  briefly 
mentioning: 
• Robustness vs Privacy: both 
criteria are strongly connected, 
with techniques coming from 
Privacy literature like Adversar ial 
Testing (De Cristofaro, 2020)  
percolating to Robustness, and 
defence mechanisms built by the 
Robustness (Müller et al., 2019)  
community looping back.  
• Privacy vs Fairness : respect for privacy and for fairness within the same system int roduces 
the quest ion of trade -offs between the two values. From the perspective of privacy, 
particularly in cases of personal data, the further a system is to anonymity the more ‘private’ 
it can be said to be. Conversely, in the case of fairness the concern is that systems  perform 
equally for all protected attributes and, as such, systems need to be as transparent as possible 
for fairness to be assured. The tension bet ween privacy and fairness becomes apparent, 
where a greater degree of privacy is likely to come at the pric e of fairness concerns  (Kazim 
and Koshiyama, 2020a).   
 
Notwithstanding the critical nature of trade-off analysis it should be noted that the intersection of all 
these areas is often impossible to achieve and not always desirable. Trade -offs should be seen  as a 
way of finding an operational profile which is consistent with the needs of the application, rather than 
some abstract goal which needs to be achieved for a notion of “completeness”. 
 
Future Investigations  
One of the key challenges is to define what risks should be prioritized and measured. This is solved 
case-by-case, however a roadmap or toolkit could be developed to provide business users and 
developers with the right recommendation and areas to focus. In this perspective, future 
investigations could look at, given a specific algorithm, how to: 
• Define the appropriate vertical or risks that should be prioritized as well as the right control 
levels for them: 
o Bias and Discrimination , such as when the algorithm will affect individuals or 
groups. 
o Performance and Robustness, such as when the algorithm can cause financial and 
reputational damage by not being statistically accurate or brittle. 
o Interpretability and Explainability, such as when the lack of understanding of the 
decisions being made, suggestions being provided, or recourse is needed. 
o Privacy, such as when the possibility of leakage of intellectual property or private 
information is a feasible event.  
 
• Monitor metrics and recommend interventions depending on the phase, information 
provided, and the type of the project involved. 
o Development/procurement phase: provide recommendations of useful tools and 
techniques to include so that risks can be mitigated and avoided. 
o Deployment phase: request information about performance, bias and other 
metrics that is needed to assure that the risks are under control. 
 
Figure 10: Interaction between all verticals. T he values 
displayed were estimated by permutation importance using 
Accuracy and Average Odds Difference as loss metrics. 
Data 
Minimization
Important 
Variables
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
16 
5. Levels of Access for Auditing 
There are different levels of access that an auditor has 
during its investigation of an algorithm. In the scientific 
literature and technical reports, the commonplace is to 
categorize the knowledge about the system in two 
extremes: ‘White -box’ and ‘Black -box’. In fact, the 
spectrum about the knowledge of a system is more of 
‘shades of gr ey’ i.e. a continuum  than this simple 
dichotomy. This additional nuance allows a ric her 
exploration of the technologies available for 
assessment and mitigation, as well as the right level of 
disclosure that a certain business feels comfortable to 
engage.  
 
Hence, we can identify seven levels of access that an auditor can have of a system (Table 3). It ranges 
from ‘Process-access’ where only indirect observation of a system can be made to ‘White-box’ where 
all the details encompassing the model are disclosed . The levels in between are set by limiting the 
access to the components behind the learning process (e.g. knowledge of the objective f unction, 
model architecture, input data, etc.).  
 
This categorization has the following two monotonic properties: 
 
• Detail: accuracy and richness increase with levels; 
• Concealment: information concealed decrease with levels; 
 
In what follows we explore the trade-off: detail and concealment (Figure 11). It is worth mention ing 
that Level 7 access allows all the analysis of above levels, simply because we have full access to the 
algorithm. Conversely, analysis and techniques requiring Level 7 cannot  be used at Level 6 without 
proper assumptions. Hence, Level 7 contains all the assessment, monitoring, and mitigation strategies 
of upper levels, with the report getting less detailed and inaccurate as levels increase. 
 
 
Table 3. Landscape of Algorithm Auditing. 
 
 
 
Dimension Level 1 
Process access 
Level 2 
Model access 
𝑓(. ) 
Level 3 
Input access 
𝑓(𝑥) 
Level 4 
Outcome access 
𝑓(𝑥), 𝑦 
Level 5 
Parameter control 
𝑓𝜃 (𝑥), 𝑦 
Level 6 
Learning goal 
𝐿(𝑓𝜃 (𝑥), 𝑦) 
Level 7 
‘White-box’ 
Explainability Checklist 
Feature 
relevance 
Partial 
Dependency 
Surrogate 
explanations 
Accuracy of 
explanations 
Stability of 
explanations 
Model 
complexity 
Documents 
and specific 
explanations 
Robustness Checklist Adversarial 
attacks Synthetic data Concept drift 
analysis Stability analysis Stress-testing 
Model 
selection and 
validation 
Fairness Checklist Adversarial 
fairness 
Bias in 
outcome 
Bias in 
opportunity 
Stability of bias 
metrics 
Trade-off of 
bias and loss 
metric 
Model 
selection and 
development 
Privacy Checklist Statistical 
disclosure 
Property and 
membership 
inference 
Inversion 
attacks 
Functionality 
stealing 
Model 
extraction 
Model 
security 
evaluation 
Information 
Concealed Very High High High High/Medium Medium Medium Low 
Feedback 
Detail Low Medium Medium High/Medium High High Very High 
Typical 
Application 
Sales 
Forecasting Cyber-security Recruitment Credit-scoring Facial Recognition Algorithmic 
Trading 
Self-driving 
vehicle 
Appropriate 
Oversight Guidelines 
External 
Auditing/ 
Certification 
External 
Auditing 
External 
Auditing External Auditing 
Internal/ 
External 
Auditing 
Internal 
Auditing 
 
Figure 11: Information concealed versus 
feedback detail trade-off curve. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
17 
5.1 Level 7: ‘White-box’ Auditing 
In the ‘White-box’ setup, the auditor knows all the details encompassing the model : architecture or 
type 𝑓, learning procedure and task objectives 𝐿, parameters 𝜃, output 𝑦 and input 𝑥 data used to 
train and validate the model, and the access to perform predictions 𝑓(. ).  
 
This level of access, very much identical to the system developer and business user have, allows the 
auditor to provide an accurate and richer feedback. Accurate because the whole assessment was 
performed using the actual system and based in little no assumptions; richer because the number of 
tests and recommendations that can be made range from the actual model selection, training, bias 
mitigation, validation, and security. I t would be easier to assess mitigation strategies and provide 
actual information that can be more easily documented by the developers. 
 
This level of access is more appropriate for internal auditors or in-house consultants, since this would 
demand an addit ional level of disclosure that may require non -disclosure, intellectual property 
sharing, data sharing, etc. agreements in place. 
5.2 Level 6: Learning goal  
In the Le arning goal setup, the auditor knows most of the details encompassing the creation and 
purpose of the predictive system: learning procedure and task objectives 𝐿, parameters 𝜃, output 𝑦 
and input 𝑥 data used to train and validate the model, and the access to perform predictions 𝑓(. ).  
 
From a modelling point of view, the auditor knows how to refit/re-learn the model using the actual 
incentives/objective function that it was trained on 𝐿(𝑓𝜃(𝑥), 𝑦), but without knowing the model 𝑓 is 
family (e.g. kernel method) or components (e.g. number of neurons). 
 
This level of access allows the auditor to investigate an almost accurate picture of the system, without 
necessarily infringing much of the intellectual property. The feedback has a high degree of detail, with 
information of the model complexity, stress -testing, and trade-off analysis of bias, privacy, and loss 
being able to be performed without little to no assumptions. This level of access is enough to perform 
automated internal and external auditing, since the human involvement after setting up the APIs and 
environments, are considerably low. 
5.3 Level 5: Parameter Manipulation 
In the Parameter manipulation setup, the auditor can recalibrate/reparametrized the model, but has 
no information of its type o r family, and what is the incentives/objective function it was built on. 
Hence, the auditor has access to parameters 𝜃, output 𝑦 and input 𝑥 data used to train and validate 
the model, and the access to perform predictions 𝑓(. ). 
 
This level allows explicitly the auditor to perform stability and perturbation analysis on the model 𝑓𝜃. 
Hence, it enables to provide a reasonable feedback, covering particularl y areas of how stable the 
system is performing, its judgements and the explanations being provided. Also, it would allow the 
auditor to assess the risk of functionality stealing from a privacy point of vie w. This level of access is 
relatively straightforward to implement via an API and can be easily automated for external auditing. 
The level of information known about the model nature is relatively low, allowing a low infringement 
of intellectual property or disclosures of other nature. 
 
Also, since the auditor can reparametrize the model, and based on certain assumptions, the auditor 
can in practice retrain the model. It means that some analysis that would only be possible having Level 
2 access could be performed in Level 3, but these assessments will only be considerate as ‘assumption-
based scenario-analysis’ rather than actual Level 2 feedback. 
5.4 Level 4: Outcome Access (‘Gray-box’) 
In the Outcome access level, the auditor has the capacity to make predictive calls with the model using 
the actual input data, and to compare with outcome/output/target information. Therefore, the 
auditor has access to output 𝑦 and input 𝑥 data used to train and validate the model, and the access 
to perform predictions 𝑓(. ). 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
18 
This setup is deemed by some authors as ‘black-box’, since the auditor does not know the parameters 
and architecture of the model . From a modelling perspective, a host of techniques are available to 
assess and operate at this level, most of them under the umbrella of ‘model-agnostic’ procedures (e.g. 
cross-validation, Shapley Values, etc.).   
 
Since there are higher levels of non-access, we deem this level as ‘Grey-box’ since some information 
is still known to the auditor. With the available access, and based on a few assumptions, the auditor 
can perform concept drift analysis, investigate the accuracy of explanations, perform inversion 
attacks, and check bias from an equality of opportunity point of view (e.g. Equal Odds Difference). The 
auditor can also build baseline or competitor models to 𝑓. 
 
Depending on the specifics, this yields a high to medium level of detail in the final feedback provided. 
From this level onwards, apart from data sharing agreements,  there’s little to no need to share 
intellectual property or development details. The level of automa tion that can be achieved and 
implemented make it possible to perform most analysis quicker and possibly in real-time.   
5.5 Level 3: Input Data Access 
In the Input data access setup, the auditor has the capacity to make predictive calls with the model 
using the actual inputs that has been used to train and validate it but cannot compare the predictions 
with the actual outcome data. That is, the auditor has only  access to input 𝑥 data used to train and 
validate the model, and the access to perform predictions 𝑓(. ). 
 
The absence of outcome information 𝑦 makes the problem of assessing the generalization behaviour 
of a model hard, particularly to assess its performance. Since only the predictions 𝑓(𝑥) are available, 
some analysis can still be performed, like c omputing bias from an equality of outcome perspective 
(e.g. Disparate Impact), property and membership inference, or creating surrogate explanations. 
Synthetic data, near to the actual distribution of the input 𝑥 can be generated, allowing for an 
investigation of the model brittleness to gradual changes in the distribution.  
5.6 Level 2: Model Access (‘Black-box’) 
In the Model access level, the auditor has the possibility to make predictive calls with the model, but 
without having any information about the actual distributions of the input data. Some metadata could 
be shared, for example, the name of the variables, types, ranges, etc. Therefore, the auditor has only 
access to perform calls in 𝑓(. ) using some artificial input 𝑥∗. 
 
This level of access entails the least amount of information disclosed to the auditor, since no data 
sharing agreements are needed. The level of automation that can be achieved is very high, since only 
API access is needed to perform the analysis. Most of the quantitative analysis performed is centered 
around an adversary setup, resembling the work of threat models performed in the privacy space. 
Adversarial attacks, adversarial evaluation of bias and discriminatio n (fairness), extracting feature 
relevance and partial dependency explanations, and different forms of privacy attacks (under the 
umbrella of statistical disclosure) are typical analysis that could be performed. 
5.7 Level 1: Process Access 
In the Process access setup, the auditor has no direct access t o the algorithm, with its investigations 
and interventions occurring at the model development process. With the impossibility to perform calls 
at the model 𝑓, the auditor depends on checklists that can be partial ly qualitative and quantitative 
information. General and sector -specific guidelines issued by regulators and other governmental 
bodies supplemented by a combination of company/application -specific could form the body of the 
assessment. Probably for low -stakes and low -risk applications, this level o f disclosure and feedback 
detail might be the most appropriate. 
 
We believe that the above level of access scheme can be utilised by regulators and standard bodies 
in the context of balancing proprietary respect and risk, where context and sector sensitivities will be 
critical in deciding the level of access required.  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
19 
Future Investigations 
One of the key challenges is to specify which types of processes would be in play  at each of these 
levels. For example, for each level how much interaction the auditor would need with the company 
being audited. One can imagine that for the deepest level of auditing, it may be necessary to first 
interview the key people in the company to a scertain their desires and goals for the operational 
parameters of the algorithms. Conversely, for the lowest level of auditing , simple checklists and 
self-assessment forms, may be sufficient. Perhaps also an automated tooling running over data and 
algorithms to produce high-level analysis. 
 
On a  more methodological side, it is difficult for a layman to assess which is the right level of 
auditing/oversight needed for a given algorithm. A roadmap or toolkit could be employed to set the 
right level of oversight needed for the AI application being developed or acquired: 
o ‘Checklist-level’: when the risks are low, and no oversight is needed. 
o ‘Black-box level’: when the risks are low-medium and little oversight is needed. 
o ‘Grey-box level’: when the risks are medium, and some oversight is needed. 
o ‘Glass-box level’: when the risks are medium-high and full oversight is necessary. 
Even though it is application specific, undoubtedly the sector and company size will affect the level 
of auditability available. We conjectu re that startups will be more inclined to  be open when they 
are being procured by large organizations. We are not sure about middle size or small organizations 
though. Questions related to protection of intellectual property, business sensitive information, etc. 
will be raised and may demand a cl ear protocol from a legal point of view.  Finally, the need for 
auditing to be reproducible and scalable are crucially important. 
 
 
6. Mitigation Strategies 
Mitigation strategies are a set of techniques 
employed to address issues highlighted in the 
assessment part of algorithm auditing. They 
consist of specific procedures  that can be 
used in conjunction in order to enhance an 
algorithm performance or solve issues like 
algorithm debiasing or establishing surrogate 
explanations. To some extent they act as ‘add-
ons’ to certain stages of model development, 
and hence, demand a retraining and 
reassessment of the model -- Figure 12 
establishes this feedback loop. We can 
highlight two types of mitigation procedures: 
 
• Human: all procedures that involve how algorithm developers design, collaborate, reflect and 
develop algorithms. These procedures can involve (re)training, impact assessment, etc. 
• Algorithm: all methodologies that can be applied to improve an algorithm current outcome. 
 
These approaches are not in conflict and one solution may end-up using both procedures in concert. 
In this section  we explore mainly the mitigation strategies that can be employed to improve an 
algorithm Robustness, Explainability, Privacy and Fairness. 
 
Performance and Robustness: each technical criterion listed in section 4.1. embodies several technical 
mitigations strategies  (Table 4). These  technical strategies can aid the analyst in measuring the 
expected generalization performance, detecting concept drifts, avoiding adversarial attacks,  and 
having best practices in terms of systems development and algorithm deployment. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12: Feedback loop: from model development, 
assessment and mitigation, to redevelopment, 
reassessment and re-mitigation. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
20 
Table 4. Mapping technical criteria and solutions for algorithm robustness and performance. 
Criteria Technical Solution 
Expected 
generalization 
performance 
▪ Cross-validation (Arlot and Celisse 2010): k-fold-cv, leave-one-out, etc.  
▪ Covariance-penalty (Efron and Hastie, 2016) : Mallow’s 𝐶𝑝, Stein Unbiased 
Risk Estimator 
▪ Concept drift (Lu et al, 2018; Escovedo et al., 2018) : gradual mitigation , 
abrupt correction, pre-emptive detection 
Adversarial 
robustness 
▪ Evasion attacks : fast gradient sign method  (Huang et al., 2017) , DeepFool  
(Moosavi-Dezfooli, 2016), etc.   
▪ Defence: label smoothing  (Müller et al., 2019), variance minimization  (Guo 
et al., 2017), Thermometer Encoding (Buckman et al., 2018), etc. 
Formal verification 
▪ Complete: Satisfiability Modulo Theory  (Bunel et al., 2018; Barrett et al., 
2018), Mixed Integer Programming (Tjeng and Tedrake, 2017) etc. 
▪ Incomplete: Propagating bounds (Huang et al., 2019), Lagrangian Relaxation 
(Dvijotham et al., 2018), etc. 
Reliability and 
reproducibility 
▪ Code versioning: Git (Github), Mercurial (BitBucket), etc. 
▪ Reproducible analysis: Binder, Docker, etc. 
▪ Automated testing: Travis CI, Scrutinizer CI, etc. 
 
Explainability and Inter pretability: most interpretability and explainability enhancing strategies 
concentrate at in processing and post-processing stage (Table 5). We can split the procedures mainly 
in the model -specific and model -agnostic axis, with all model -specific approache s being able to 
provide global and local explanations by -design (in-processing). Model-agnostic procedures act as a 
post-hoc ‘wrapper’ around an algorithm, with some techniques only focusing on local explanations 
(e.g. LIME) or global explanations (e.g. Pa rtial Dependency plots). The mitigation strategies need to  
take into account the use case domain and level of risk, the organisation’s risk appetite, all applicable 
regulation and laws, and values/ethical considerations. 
 
Table 5. Modelling stage and different technical solutions for algorithm explainability and interpretability. 
Stage/Method Technical Solution 
In-processing/ 
Model-specific 
▪ Rule-based explanations: decision trees, rule-induction methods 
▪ Model’s coefficients: linear regression, linear discriminant analysis 
▪ Nearest prototype: k-nearest-neighbour, Naïve-Bayes 
Post-processing/ 
Model-agnostic 
▪ Surrogate explanations: LIME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) , Explainable Boosting 
Machines (Nori et al., 2019), PIRL (Puiutta et al., 2020) 
▪ Perturbation: Gradient-based Attribution Methods  (Ancona et al., 2017) , 
Permutation Importance (Breiman, 2001), SHAP (Lundberg and Lee, 2017) 
▪ Simulation analysis (what-if?): counterfactual explanations and algorithmic 
recourse (Wachter, 2017; Karimi et al., 2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
21 
Bias and Discrimination: regardless of the measure used, algorithm bias can be mitigated at different 
points in a modelling pipeline: Pre-processing, In-processing, an d Post-processing (Bellamy et al., 
2018). Table 6 presents a snapshot of different methodologies to mitigate bias in AI systems. 
 
Table 6. Modelling stage and different technical solutions for algorithm bias and discrimination. 
Stage Technical Solution 
Pre-processing 
▪ Reweighing subjects (Kamiran et al., 2012) 
▪ Oversampling minority group (Iosifidis and Ntoutsi, 2018) 
▪ Disparate Impact Remover (Feldman et al., 2015) 
▪ Learning Fair Representations (Zemel et al., 2013) 
In-processing 
▪ Adversarial Debiasing (Zhang et al., 2018) 
▪ Fairness constraint (Zafar et al., 2019; Donini et al., 2018) 
▪ Counterfactual Fairness (Kusner et al., 2017) 
Post-processing ▪ Calibrated equality of odds (Pleiss et al., 2017) 
▪ Reject option classification (Kamiran et al., 2012) 
 
Algorithm Privacy: from an engineering standpoint, there are emerging privacy-enhancing techniques 
to mitigate personal or critical data leakage. These techniques can act in different moments of the 
system development: (i) during pre -processing stage by feature selection, dataset pseudo -
anonymisation and perturbation; (ii) during in -processing by using fe derated learning, differential 
privacy, and model inversion mitigation; and (iii) deployment by imple ment rate-limiting and user’s 
queries management. Table 7 presents these methods and key references. 
 
Table 7. Modelling pipeline and different technical solutions for algorithm privacy. 
 
Stage Technical Solution 
Pre-processing 
▪ Data Minimisation by Dim Reduction (Goldsteen et al., 2020) 
▪ Dataset (Pseudo)-Anonymisation (Neubauer and Heurix, 2011) 
▪ Dataset Perturbation (Kargupta et al., 2005) 
In-processing 
▪ Federated Learning (McMahan and Ramage, 2017; Kim et al., 2019) 
▪ Differential Privacy (Abadi et al., 2016; Dwork et al., 2015) 
▪ Model Inversion Mitigation (Fredrikson et al., 2015) 
▪ Data Poisoning Defence (Steinhardt et al., 2017) 
Deployment ▪ Rate-limiting 
▪ User’s queries management 
 
Future Investigations  
On the mitigation point generally, one assumes that the auditor would recommend the mitigation 
procedures that would need to be applied in order to address identified issues. Perhaps they would 
recommend a range of options. Perhaps they would require a given mitigation even. Different levels 
would demand different timelines and activities. Figure 12 fleshes out the general perspective, but 
one could explore in more detail what could be done in different levels, such as:  
• Level 7 – ‘White-box’ level 
o starts with an interview for goals and context with the development and business 
team;  
o deep dive to examine the system with the development team;  
o write a report with the details of the system and the business problem it is aiming 
to solve as well as recommendations to improve it;  
o mitigation strategies are implemented, and the system is re-developed; 
o another audit is performed to assure that the key performance metrics are 
attained. 
• Level 1 – ‘Checklist’ level 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
22 
o starts with a self-assessment performed by the team developing the system; 
o depending on the stage of development and verticals to be prioritized, 
recommendations of interventions or metrics are reported; 
o a final documentation is issued with possible monitoring an d checkpoints for 
further assessment. 
 
7. Assurance Processes 
The broader outcome of an auditing process is to improve confidence or ensure trust of the underlying 
system. After assessi ng the system, and implementing mitigation strategies, the auditing proce ss 
assesses whether the system conforms to regulatory, governance and ethical standards. Providing 
assurance, therefore, needs to be understood through different dimensions and steps needs to be 
taken so that the algorithm can be shown to be trustworthy. B elow we list the key points that 
embodies the assurance process: 
• General and sector -specific assurance: broad national regulation and standards (provided 
agents such as NIST, UK -ICO, EU, etc.) with sector specific ones, such as in financial services 
(e.g. SEC, FCA, etc.), health (e.g. NIH, NHS, etc.), real estate (e.g. RICS, IVS, USPAP), etc. 
• Governance: from two aspects, namely technical assessments (robustness, privacy, etc.) and 
impact (risk, compliance, etc.) assessments.  
• Unknown Risks:  discussing risk  schemes and highlighting ‘red teaming’, which is used to 
mitigate unknown risks.  
• Monitoring Interfaces: outlining risk assessments and the use of ‘traffic -light’ user friendly 
monitoring interfaces. 
• Certification: the numerous ways in which certification  may occur, such as certification of a 
system or AI engineers, etc.  
• Insurance: a subsequent service to emerge as a result of assurance maturing.  
Figure 13 outlines the steps towards assurance: combining governance and impact assessments with 
audit and te chnical assessment; finding equivalent standards and regulations in the sector /end-
application; generating a document/audit trail that will feed into a certification and insurance as part 
of assurance. We expand each point in the forthcoming subsections. 
 
 
Figure 13. Diagram outlining the steps towards assurance: combining governance and impact assessments with audit 
and technical assessment; finding equivalent standards and regulation s in the sector/end -application; generating a 
document/audit trail that will feed into a certification and insurance as part of assurance. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
23 
7.1 General and sector-specific 
The satisfaction of a particular standard - ex. certification, auditability, etc. - will become mandatory. 
We read this from the growing calls for AI, ML and associated algorithms to be responsibly developed 
and appropriately governed (European Commission, 2020; UK Committee on Standards in Public Life; 
UK-ICO, 2020; ICO, 2020). We anticipate that standards will be both general and sector specific: 
• General Standards: the guidance (which may or may not be legally codified) will e ncompass 
broad dimensions such as privacy, explainability, safety and fairness, and these will be set by 
institutions and bodies with non -sector specific remits (e .g. the UK’s Information 
Commissioner’s Office). Developments in this space are becoming more  concrete. For 
instance, in the recent ‘Explaining decisions made with AI’ , the Information Commissioner’s 
Office & The Alan Turing Institute (ICO-Turing, 2020) advises on how organisations can explain 
the processes, services and decisions delivered or assisted by AI to those that are affected by 
such decisions - the guidance outlines explanations in terms of who is responsible, data 
choices and management, fairness considerations, safety and impact.   
• Sector Standards:  sector specific guidance already exi sts. These address idiosyncrasies of 
application. For example, the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority is leading in the debate about 
standards of AI systems in financial services (Mueller and Ostmann, 2020), UK’s Care Quality 
Commission in ML development for  medical diagnostic services  (UK-CQC, 2020) , US’s 
Department of Defence in the defence space (US-DOD, 2020). In addition  to sector specific 
regulators issuing guidance, sectors themselves are developing their own standards and 
approaches to best practice. Recruitment is an example of this (UK-CDEI, 2020). Application-
specific, like the US’s NIST for Facial Recognition (NIST, 2020), is a promising avenue. 
7.2 Governance 
Governance can be divided into two broad streams, namely technical and non-technical:  
• Non-technical governance: concerns systems and processes that focus on allocating decision 
makers, providing appropriate training and education, keeping the human -in-the-loop, and 
conducting social and environmental impact assessments. The issue of accountabilit y and 
sector specific particularities dominate the current debate; here what is being referred to is: 
o who will be liable if something goes wrong (processor, control ler, user) i.e. the 
allocation of responsibility;  
o what current legislation like GDPR, financial regulations, etc. have to say on a case-by-
case basis; and  
o differences between countries and economic blocks.  
Within this context there is also the Algorithmic Impact Assessment literature, which calls for 
doing a Data Protection Impact assessment w hen algorithms are used (Reisman et al., 2019; 
Koshiyama and Engin, 2019; Canada, 2019; Kaminski and Malgieri, 2020).  Additionally, there 
are calls for AI impact as sessments that address issues of human -rights, social and 
environmental concerns (McGregor et al, 2019; EU-HLEG, 2018).   
 
• Technical governance:  concerns systems and processes that render the activity of the 
technology itself accountable and transparent. This touches upon ethical -by-design and 
technical auditing (involving creation of quantitative metrics for tracing and tracking decisions, 
making the technologies accessible for verification and accountability). The main dimensions 
of technical auditing that will be surveyed are (European Commission, 2020): 
o Robustness and Performance: systems should be safe and secure, not vulnerable to 
tampering or compromising - including the data they are trained on. Key concepts in 
this dimension are resilience to attack and security, fallback plan and general safety, 
accuracy/performance, and reliability and reproducibility. 
o Bias and Discrimination (Fairness): systems should use training data and models that 
account for bias in data, to avoid unfair treatment of certain groups. By bias we mean, 
for example, yielding more false positives to a group  in relation t o another (young 
people vs older people, etc.). Key sources of bias include tainted or skewed examples, 
limited features, sample size disparity and proxies to protected attributes. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
24 
o Explainability and Interpretability: systems should provide d ecisions or suggestions 
that can be understood by their users and developers. Key techniques in this space 
are individual/local explanations, population/global explanations, model -agnostic 
and model-specific interpretations. 
o Privacy: systems should be trai ned following data minimization principles as well as 
adopt privacy-enhancing techniques to mitigate personal or critical data leakage. Key 
concepts in this area are data protection, quality, accuracy, integrity and access to 
data and decisions. 
7.3 Monitoring interfaces 
A risk-based approach , a s observed 
in the European Commission's White 
Paper on Artificial Intelligence and 
the German Data Ethics Commission  
(German Data Ethics Commission , 
2019), outlines two distinct notions 
of risks: 
 
• Sectorial: where high -risk is 
identified with respect to 
things such as healthcare, 
transport, energy, and, parts 
of the public sector (ex. 
asylum, social security and 
employment services).  
 
We note that all these sectors have 
the commonality of human impact i.e. whether a service, instruct ion, decision, etc. impacts on a 
human user and citizen. This is a broad, abstracted and blanketed approach, that is highly likely to 
result in two things, i. risk aversion, and ii. autonomous systems will be a high cost venture . For 
example, a simple heal thcare booking chatbot can become economically unfeasible because it falls 
under healthcare. Similarly, in the context of high-risk high-reward a risk-based approach based upon 
sector will discourage potentially high-positive impact algorithmic systems (ex. Medical applications 
of AI has significant risk and lifesaving potential). As such we believe this will stifle innovation (which 
is what the EU white paper calls for).  
 
• Use: The second notion of risk introduced is that ‘where use means that significant risk is likely 
to arise (risk of injury, death or significant material or immaterial damage)’.   
Table 8. Risk matrix outlining concerns and mitigation between 
technical/non-technical dimensions and known/unknown risks. 
Audit and Impact 
Assessment Known Unknown 
Technical 
Bias/fairness; safety; 
explainable; accessibility; 
data protection; trails; 
verification; 
comprehensibility. 
Breakdown/ro
bustness; 
nature of hack 
(theft; DOS) 
Non-Technical 
Governance; oversight; 
whistle blowing; lack of 
education 
(education/training); 
authorisation. 
Trust; 
reputational; 
psychological 
and social 
impact; loss of 
skills; 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
25 
A concern with this categorisation of risk is that 
it is unclear how unintended consequences can 
be assessed.  We argue that risk can be thought 
of in terms o f known and unknown risk, and 
technical and non -technical risk (presented in 
‘Risk Matrix’ Table 8  (Kazim and Koshiyama, 
2020b).  
 
Given the problems referred to above and the 
vagueness of ‘risk’ in these calls, drawing from 
industry precedence, intuitive performance 
dashboard stop -light interfaces have been 
proposed – these will facilitate monitoring of 
performance over time  (Bellotti et al 2020; 
Brundage et al 2020). With Green, Amber and 
Red representing  high-performance, 
satisfactory-performance and poo r-
performance respectively. Furthermore, from a 
regulatory and standards standpoint, the UK’s 
Information Commissioner’s Office has a colour 
coded ‘Assurance Rating’ for Data ( Figure 14). 
A stop light system can be used in several ways, 
like in  the deploym ent phase where green, 
amber and red can be read in terms of how a 
system is performing in accordance with the 
purpose of its deployment. Within the context 
of assurance and audit the respective colours ca n be read in terms of high -performing/compliant 
(green), low-performing/compliant (amber), non-compliant (red). 
7.4 Unknown risks 
Foundational to safety is that steps should be taken and procedures in place that prevent harm. This 
preventative approach requires that risks are anticipated in order to ensure that the chances of them 
occurring are minimised and if they do occur then the impact is minimal. In order to so this, risk 
assessments are performed - in the context of the above, we can think of two kinds of risk assessment: 
 
• Technical audits: conducted in the development phase and for live monitoring. 
• Impact assessments: conducted before deployment and to design mitigation strategies. 
 
Note that in Table 8 the known technical and non -technical risks are covered by audit and impact 
assessment; this leaves th e unknown technical and non -technical risks. Within the literature one 
approach to addressing such unknown risks is through ‘Red Teaming’ (Brundage et al 2020) [24]:  
• Red Teaming : a systematic attempt to probe, expose flaws and weaknesses in a system, 
process, organisation etc., both technical and non -technical, is undertaken. The ‘red team 
exercise’ assumes the persona of a hostile agent, with the hope that in exposing thereunto 
unanticipated weaknesses i.e. unknown risks, the risk mitigation can be improved.  
 
Although there will still be unknown risks, through such activities it is hoped that best practice can be 
established; notwithstanding proprietary issues, this can be facilit ated through knowledge -transfer 
(via publication of methods to probe ‘attack’ and mitigate) (Brundage et al 2020)  [24].  
7.5 Certification 
Certification is the part of the assurance process by confirming that a system, process, organisation, 
etc. satisfies a particular standard. It is typically intertwined with regulatory requirements. However, 
certification can also be granted by industry bodies or other recognised authorities. We read 
certification as a final ‘stamp’ or confirmation, which can be achieved vi a providing evidence and 
 
Figure 14. UK’s Information Commissioner’s Office has a 
colour coded ‘Assurance R ating’ for Data . Available at: 
https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/audits/  
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
26 
proving that a system, process, organisation has satisfied the set standards. Certification may come in 
a number of forms, including:  
 
• Certification of a system:  here, likely to align with national regulatory and standard bodies, 
the use of AI i.e. the systems and governance, is may be certified as trustw orthy or 
responsible. This may be akin to the granting of an organisational licence.  
• Sector specific certification:  here it is possible that sector standard bodies and regulators  
issue their own sector specific certification.  
• Certification of a responsible agent: good practice and industry standards within the context 
of data protection has led to the position of a ‘Data Protection Officer’, and by analogy 
something akin to a ‘Responsible AI Officer’ may emerge. These officers may be certified.  
• Certification of Algorithm Engineers: Here the AI engineers may be certified, as though being 
granted a licence or admission into an accreditation organization (c.f. Trade Association).  
 
Another possibility is that certification may be issued for specific aspects  of a system; here 
certifications for Robustness, Explainability, Privacy and bias and discrimination may be issued.  
7.6 Insurance 
Closely related to assurance is the insurance of algorithms. It is possible that this will become a 
significant risk mitigation requirement for companies engaged in automation, and as such a significant 
market for insurers. We envision that this will align closely with Explainability and Algorithm Auditing 
in accordance with regulation and standards. Pricing such contracts will demand understanding of the 
risks involved in each vertical of the algorithm system (Robustness, Bias, etc.) as well as indemnity 
insurance for high-risk sectors or high-risk end-application.  
 
Future Investigations  
Certification is a topic that demands a se ction of its own . Questions related to: should one  
certificate be issued for the whole process, or parts of the system? What could be shared with third 
parties to declare that the algorithms have been audited and verified. This brings us into the area 
of certificating authorities – who are they and what are their roles – how do they (if at all) differ 
from the auditor. 
 
Accountability roles is a topic that also demands another section, separating the obligations of each 
of the players in the supply chain - the one that commissions the algorithm, the designer, the coder, 
the tester, the operator, and so on. One can use analogies such as a comparison with the General 
Product safety regulations, where the obligations are primarily on the manufacturer of goods, but 
the distributor and retailers have lesser but serious obligations to ensure safety. 
 
8. Final Remarks  
This work is a first step towards understanding the key components underlying Algorithm Auditing. 
We provide a list of definitions and a taxonomy, sinc e this area is a combination of research done 
mostly in silos, such as bias and discrimi nation, robustness, explainability, and privacy. Our goal with 
this paper is to instigate the debate in this novel area of research and practice  and to kick-start that 
debate with a robust set of areas, processes and strategies . Translating concepts such a s 
Accountability, Fairness, Transparency, into engineering practice is non -trivial, with its impact 
perceived in design choices, algorithms to be used, delivery mechanisms and built infrastructure.  This 
demands a full integration with respect to governance structures with real-time algorithm auditing. 
 
We foresee that a new industry is emerging, Auditing and Assurance of Data and Algorithms, with the 
remit to profession alize and industrialize AI, ML and associated algorithms. Since the magnitude of 
the cha llenge will increase year -on-year for the foreseeable future, this industry will increasingly 
demand human capital (AI/Digital ethicists, data scientists), RegTech -inspired solutions and business 
models ( Treleaven and Batrinca, 2017 ), and (thought -)leadership from concerned regulators, 
politicians, NGOs, and academics. 
 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
27 
Below we highlight related questions (which have not been covered extensively in this document): 
 
• AI, ML and Algorithm Ethics: with the proliferation of AI research and deployment, along with 
high-profile cases of harm, awareness of the social impact and ethical implications of AI has 
risen to the fore. What is now referred to as ‘AI ethics’ or ‘trustworth y AI’ or ‘responsible AI’ 
is the body of literature that has resulted because of this co nsciousness and debate  
(Hagendorff, 2020) . The field of AI ethics has undergone three broad phases  (Kazim and 
Koshiyama, 2020c): principles, ethical-by-design approach, and – indeed the current phase – 
as concerned with the need to standardise and operationalise the AI ethics discipline.  
• Legal Status of Algorithms: there is the growing discussion regarding algorithms and the law, 
in particular concerns regarding fairness and automation (Wachter et al., 2020) in the Judiciary 
concerning the ‘status of algorithms in Law’. In Law, as we know, companies have the rights 
and obligations of a person. Algorithms are rapidly emerging as artificial persons: a legal entity 
that is not a human being but for certain purposes is legally considered to be a natural person 
(Treleaven et al., 2019). The argument is that since algorithms are doing or intermediating 
business (agency) with humans, companies and even other algorithms they also need to have 
the status of an artificial person in Law. 
 
Finally, to reiterate some points made previously, there is a growing demand for a tool that could 
assist procurement, information security and internal developers of AI applications to self-assess a 
solution and flag if: 
• They are performing low-risk applications and should go ahead. 
• They are performing medium-risk applications  and should provide more information and 
implement mitigations strategies. 
• They are performing high-risk applications and should go through a review process before 
deploying their solution across business. 
 
We believe that this could be the interface that would connect the verticals and the different 
mitigation strategies. 
Acknowledgements 
Adriano Koshiyama and Philip Treleaven  would like to acknowledge Cisco Research Centre for their 
research g rant (#2019-207109, 3696). We would like to thank Lindsay Edwards,  Pratik Ajmera , 
Harshwardhan Prasad , Nick Firoozye,  Graca Carvalho,  Lisa Whiting , Magdalena Lis , Mark Durkee , 
Alastair Pearson Roger Taylor, Umar Mohammed, and Michael Cheetham for their valuable support. 
We would also like to acknowledge the different stakeholders from the UK CQC, FCA and ICO for the 
multiple interactions, publications and activities that have informed this emerging area of research. 
 
References 
Abadi, M., Chu, A., Goodfellow, I., McMahan, H. B., Mironov, I., Talwar, K., & Zhang, L. (2016, October). Deep learning with 
differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIG SAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (pp. 
308-318). 
Ancona, M., Ceolini, E., Öztireli, C., & Gross, M. (2017). Towards better understanding of gradient-based attribution methods 
for deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.06104. 
Andrychowicz, M., Denil, M., Gomez, S., Hoffman, M. W., Pfau, D., Schaul, T., ... & De Freitas, N. (2016). Learning to learn by 
gradient descent by gradient descent. In Advances in neural information processing systems (pp. 3981-3989). 
Arlot, S., & Celisse, A. (2010). A survey of cross-validation procedures for model selection. Statistics surveys, 4, 40-79. 
Ateniese, G., Mancini, L. V., Spognardi, A., Villani, A., Vitali, D., & Felici, G. (2015). Hacking smart machines with smarter ones: 
How to extract meaningful data from machine learning classifiers. International J of Security and Networks, 10(3), 137-150. 
Barabási, A. L. (2016). Network science. Cambridge university press. 
Barrett, C., & Tinelli, C. (2018). Satisfiability modulo theories. In Handbook of Model Checking (pp. 305-343). Springer, Cham. 
Bellamy, R. K., Dey, K., Hind, M., Hoffman, S. C., Houde, S., Kannan, K., ... & Naga r, S. (2018). AI Fairness 360: An extensible 
toolkit for detecting, understanding, and mitigating unwanted algorithmic bias. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01943. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
28 
Belloti, A., Hand, D. J., Khan, S. (2020). Predicting Through a Crisis. Second White Paper. Validate AI. 
Bieker, F., Friedewald, M., Hansen, M., Obersteller, H., & Rost, M. (2016, September). A process for data protection impa ct 
assessment under the european general data protection regulation. In Annual Privacy Forum (pp. 21-37). Springer, Cham. 
Breiman, L. (2001). Random forests. Machine learning, 45(1), 5-32. 
Brownlee, J. (2011). Clever algorithms: nature-inspired programming recipes. Jason Brownlee. 
Brundage, M., Avin, S., Wang, J., Belfield, H., Krueger, G., Hadfield, G., ... & Maharaj, T. (2020). T oward trustworthy AI 
development: mechanisms for supporting verifiable claims. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07213. 
Buckman, J., Roy, A., Raffel, C., & Goodfellow, I. (2018, February). Thermometer encoding: One hot way to resist adversarial 
examples. In International Conference on Learning Representations. 
Bunel, R. R., Turkaslan, I., Torr, P., Kohli, P., & Mudigonda, P. K. (2018). A u nified view of piecewise linear neural network 
verification. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 4790-4799). 
Butterworth, M. (2018). The ICO and artificial intelligence: The role of fairness in the GDPR framework. Computer Law & 
Security Review, 34(2), 257-268. 
Canada (2020). Directive on automated decision-making. Ottawa (ON): Government of Canada (modified 2019-02-05. 
Carlini, N., Athalye, A., Papernot, N., Brendel, W., Rauber, J., Tsipras, D., ... & Kurakin, A. (2019). On evaluating  adversarial 
robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.06705. 
Chollet, F. (2017). Deep Learning with Python. Manning Publications co. 
Chouldechova, A. (2017). Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of bias in recidivism prediction instruments. Big data, 
5(2), 153-163. 
Corbett-Davies, S., Pierson, E., Feller, A., Goel, S., & Huq, A. (2017). Algorithmic decision making and the co st of fairness. In 
Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (pp. 797-806). 
De Cristofaro, E. (2020). An Overview of Privacy in Machine Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.08679. 
Devlin, J., Chang, M. W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. (2018). Bert: Pre -training of deep bidirectional transformers for language 
understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805. 
Donini, M., Oneto, L., Ben -David, S., Shawe -Taylor, J. S., & Pontil, M. (2018). Em pirical risk minimization under fairness 
constraints. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 2791-2801). 
Dvijotham, K., Stanforth, R., Gowal, S., Mann, T. A., & Kohli, P. (2018, March). A Dual Approach to Scalable Verification of 
Deep Networks. In UAI (Vol. 1, p. 2). 
Dwork, C., & Naor, M. (2010). On the difficulties of disclosure prevention in statistical databases or the case for d ifferential 
privacy. Journal of Privacy and Confidentiality, 2(1). 
Dwork, C., Feldman, V., Hardt, M., Pitass i, T., Reingold, O., & Roth, A. (2015). Generalization in adaptive data analysis and 
holdout reuse. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 2350-2358). 
Efron, B., & Hastie, T. (2016). Computer age statistical inference (Vol. 5). Cambridge University Press. 
Escovedo, T., Koshiyama, A., da Cruz, A. A., & Vellasco, M. (2018). DetectA: abrupt concept drift detection in non-stationary 
environments. Applied Soft Computing, 62, 119-133. 
EU (2016). Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliame nt and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of 
natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing 
Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) (Text with EEA relevance) 
EU-HLEG. (2019). Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI. https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/ethics-
guidelines-trustworthy-ai  
European Commission (February 2020). White Paper on Artificial Intelligence: A European approach to excellence and trust. 
Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/info/files/commission-white-paper-artificial-intelligence-feb2020_en.pdf  
Feldman, M., Friedler, S. A., Moeller, J., Scheidegger, C., & Venkatasubramanian, S. (2015, August). Certifying and removing 
disparate impact. In proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining 
(pp. 259-268). 
Finn, C., Abbeel, P., & Levine, S. (2017, August). Model-agnostic meta -learning for fast adaptation of deep networks. In 
Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 (pp. 1126-1135). JMLR. org. 
Flennerhag, S., Moreno, P. G., Lawrence, N. D., & Damianou, A. (2018). Transfer ring knowledge across learning processes. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01054. 
Floridi, L. (2018). Soft ethics, the governance of the digital and the General Data Protection Regulation. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2133), 20180081. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
29 
Fredrikson, M., Jha, S., & Ristenpart, T. (2015, October). Mo del inversion attacks that exploit confidence information and 
basic countermeasures. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (pp. 
1322-1333). 
Fredrikson, M., Jha, S., & Ristenpart, T. (2015, October). Model inversion attacks that exploit confidence information and 
basic countermeasures. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (pp. 
1322-1333). 
Ganju, K., Wang, Q., Yang, W., Gunter, C. A., & Borisov, N. (2018, Ja nuary). Property inference attacks on fully connected 
neural networks using permutation invariant representations. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SI GSAC Conference on 
Computer and Communications Security (pp. 619-633). 
German Data Ethics Commission. (2019) . Opinion of the Data Ethics Commission. Bmjv.de. Available at: 
www.bmjv.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/Themen/ Fokusthemen/Gutachten_DEK_EN_lang.pdf (A ccessed: 30 August 
2020). 
Giarratano, J. C., & Riley, G. (1998). Expert systems. PWS publishing co.. 
Goldsteen, A., Ezov, G., Shmelkin, R., Moffie, M., & Farkash, A. (2020). Data Minimization for GDPR Compliance in Machine 
Learning Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.04113. 
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep learning. MIT press. 
Guo, C., Rana, M., Cisse, M., & Van Der Maaten, L. (2017). Countering adversarial images using input transformations. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1711.00117. 
Hagendorff, T. (2020). The ethics of AI ethics: An evaluation of guidelines. Minds and Machines, 1-22.  
Hall, P. (2019). An introduction to machine learning interpretability. O'Reilly Media, Incorporated. 
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., & Friedman, J. (2009). The elemen ts of statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction. 
Springer Science & Business Media. 
Hind, M., Mehta, S., Mojsilovic, A., Nair, R., Ramamurthy, K. N., Olteanu, A., & Varshney, K. R. (2018). Increasing trust in AI 
services through supplier's declarations of conformity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07261. 
Hitaj, B., Ateniese, G., & Perez-Cruz, F. (2017, October). Deep models under the GAN: information leakage from collaborative 
deep learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (pp. 603 -
618). 
https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-data-protection/key-data-protection-themes/explaining-decisions-made-
with-ai/ 
Huang, L., Joseph, A. D., Nelson, B., Rubinstein, B. I., & Tygar, J. D. (2011, O ctober). Adversarial machine learning. In 
Proceedings of the 4th ACM workshop on Security and artificial intelligence (pp. 43-58). ACM. 
Huang, P. S., Stanforth, R., Welbl, J., Dyer, C., Yogatama, D., Gowal, S., ... & Kohli, P. (2019). Achieving verified robustness to 
symbol substitutions via interval bound propagation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01492. 
Huang, S., Papernot, N., Goodfellow, I., Duan, Y., & Abbeel, P. (2017). Adversarial attacks on neural network policies. arXiv  
preprint arXiv:1702.02284. 
ICO ( 2020). Guidance on AI auditing framework: Draft guidance for consultation. https://ico.org.uk/ media/about-the-
ico/consultations/2617219/guidance-on-the-ai-auditing-framework-draft-for-consultation.pdf 
ICO-Turing (2020). Explaining decisions made with AI In formation. Information Commissioner's Office & The Alan Turing 
Institute. 
Iosifidis, V., & Ntoutsi, E. (2018). Dealing with bias via data augmentation in supervised learning scenarios. Jo Bates Paul D. 
Clough Robert Jäschke, 24. 
Kaminski, M. E., & Malgieri, G. (2020, January). Multi-layered explanations from algorithmic impact assessments in the GDPR. 
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (pp. 68-79). 
Kamiran, F., & Calders, T. (2012). Data preprocessing techniq ues for classification without discrimination. Knowledge and 
Information Systems, 33(1), 1-33. 
Kargupta, H., Datta, S., Wang, Q., & Sivakumar, K. (2005). Random-data perturbation techniques and privacy-preserving data 
mining. Knowledge and Information Systems, 7(4), 387-414. 
Karimi, A. H., Schölkopf, B., & Valera, I. (2020). Algorithmic Recourse: f rom Counterfactual Explanations to Interventions. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.06278. 
Kazim, E., & Koshiyama, A. (2020c). A High-Level Overview of AI Ethics. Available at SSRN. 
Kazim, E., & Koshiyama, A. (2020 a). The Interrelation Between Data and AI Ethics i n the Context of Impact Assessments. 
Available at SSRN. 
Kazim, E., and Koshiyama, A. Human Centric AI: A Comment on the IEEE’s Ethically Aligned Design (April 13, 2020b). Available 
at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3575140 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3575140.  
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
30 
Kim, H., Park, J., Bennis, M., & Kim, S. L. (2019). Blockchained on-device federated learning. IEEE Communications Letters. 
Kleinberg, J., Mullainatha n, S., & Raghavan, M. (2016). Inherent trade -offs in the fair determination of risk scores. ar Xiv 
preprint arXiv:1609.05807. 
Kleinberg, J., Mullainathan, S., & Raghavan, M. (2016). Inherent trade -offs in the fair determination of risk scores. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1609.05807. 
Koshiyama, A., & Engin, Z. (2019). Algorithmic Impact Assessment: Fairness , Robustness and Explainability in Automated 
Decision-Making. 
Koshiyama, A., Firoozye, N., & Treleaven, P. (2020). Algorithms in Future Capital Markets. Available at SSRN 3527511. 
Kurakin, A., Goodfellow, I., & Bengio, S. (2016). Adversarial machine learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01236. 
Kusner, M. J., Loftus, J., Russell, C., & Silva, R. (2017). Counterfactual fairness. In Advances in neural informati on processing 
systems (pp. 4066-4076). 
Longo, L., Goebel, R., Lecue, F., Kieseberg, P., & Holz inger, A. (2020, August). Explainable Artificial Intelligence: Concepts, 
Applications, Research Challenges and Visions. In International Cross -Domain Conference f or Machine Learning and 
Knowledge Extraction (pp. 1-16). Springer, Cham. 
Lu, J., Liu, A., Dong , F., Gu, F., Gama, J., & Zhang, G. (2018). Learning under concept drift: A review. IEEE Transactions on 
Knowledge and Data Engineering, 31(12), 2346-2363. 
Lundberg, S. M., & Lee, S. I. (2017). A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Advances in neural information 
processing systems (pp. 4765-4774). 
McGregor, L., Murray, D., and Ng, V. (2019). International human rights law as a framework for algor ithmic accountability. 
International & Comparative Law Quarterly, 68(2), 309-343. 
McMahan, B., & Ramage, D. (2017). Federated learning: Collaborative machine learning without centralized training data. 
Google Research Blog, 3. 
Melis, L., Song, C., De Crist ofaro, E., & Shmatikov, V. (2019, May). Exploiting unintended feature leakage in collaborative  
learning. In 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) (pp. 691-706). IEEE. 
Meyer, M. (2014). Continuous integration and its tools. IEEE software, 31(3), 14-16. 
Molnar, C. (2019). Interpretable machine learning. Lulu. com. 
Moosavi-Dezfooli, S. M., Fawzi, A., & Frossard, P. (2016). Deepfool: a simple and accurate method to fool deep neural 
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 2574-2582). 
Mueller, H. and Ostmann, F. (2020). AI transparency in financial services – why, what, who and when?. Financial Conduct 
Authority. Available at: https://www.fca.org.uk/insight/ai-transparency-financial-services-why-what-who-and-when 
Müller, R., Kornblith, S., & Hinton, G. E. (2019). When does label smoothing help?. In Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems (pp. 4694-4703). 
Neubauer, T., & Heurix, J. (2011). A methodology for the pseudonymization of medical data. International journal of medical 
informatics, 80(3), 190-204. 
NIST (2020). Ongoing Face Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT). National Institute of Standards and Technology. Available at: 
https://pages.nist.gov/frvt/reports/11/frvt_11_report.pdf 
Nori, H., Jenkins, S., Koch, P., & Caruana, R. (2019). Interpretml: A unified framework for machine learning interpretability. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09223. 
Orekondy, T., Schiele, B., & Fritz, M. (2019). Knockoff nets: Stealing functionality of black -box models. In Proceedings of the 
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (pp. 4954-4963). 
Pleiss, G., Raghavan, M., Wu, F., Kleinberg, J., & Weinberger, K. Q. (2017). On fairness and calibration. In Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems (pp. 5680-5689). 
Poli, R., Langdon, W. B., McPhee, N. F., & Koza, J. R. (2008). A field guide to genetic programming. Lulu. com. 
Puiutta, E., & Veith, E. (2020). Explainable Reinforcement Learning: A Survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06247. 
Qin, C., O'Dono ghue, B., Bunel, R., Stanforth, R., Gowal, S., Uesato, J., ... & Kohli, P. (2019). Verification of non -linear 
specifications for neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.09592. 
Radford, A., Wu, J., Amodei, D., Amodei, D., Clark, J., Brundage, M., & Sutskever, I. (2019). Better language models and their 
implications. OpenAI, 2018b. URL https://openai. com/blog/better-language-models. 
Reisman, D., Schultz, J., Crawford, K., & Whittaker, M. (2019). Algorithmic impact assessment: a practical framework for 
public agency accountability. AI Now Institute. 
Ribeiro, M. T., Singh, S., & Guestrin, C. (2016, August). " Why should I trust you?" Explaining the predictions of any classifier. 
In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 1135-1144). 
Rushby, J. (1988). Quality measures and assurance for AI (Artificial Intelligence) software. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612
Technical Report  January 2021 
31 
Russell, S. J., & Norvig, P. (2016). Artificial intelligence: a modern approach. Malaysia; Pearson Education Limited. 
Sharma, S., Henderson, J., & Ghosh, J. (2019). Certifai: Counterfactual explanations for robustness, transparency, 
interpretability, and fairness of artificial intelligence models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07857. 
Shokri, R., Stronati, M., Song, C., & Shma tikov, V . (2017, May). Membership inference attacks against machine learning 
models. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) (pp. 3-18). IEEE. 
Steinhardt, J., Koh, P. W. W., & Liang, P. S. (2017). Certified defences for data poisoning attacks. In Advan ces in neural 
information processing systems (pp. 3517-3529). 
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (2018). Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press. 
Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan, D., Goodfellow, I., & Fergus, R. (2013). Intriguing properties of neural 
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199. 
Tan, T. J. L., & Shokri, R. (2019). Bypassing backdoor detection algorithms in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.13409. 
Taylor, S. (Ed.). (2014). Agent-based modeling and simulation. Springer. 
Tjeng, V., & Tedrake, R. (2017). Verifying neural networks with mixed integer programming. arXiv:1711.07356, 945-950. 
Tramèr, F., Zhang, F., Juels, A., Reiter, M. K., & Ristenpart, T. (2016). Stealing machine learning models via prediction apis. In 
25th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 16) (pp. 601-618). 
Treleaven, P., & Batrinca, B. (2017). Algorithmic regulation: automating financial compliance monitoring and regulation using 
AI and blockchain. Journal of Financial Transformation, 45, 14-21. 
Treleaven, P., Barnett, J., & Koshiyama, A. (2019). Algorithms: law and regulation. Computer, 52(2), 32-40. 
UK Committee on Standards in Public Life (2020). Artificial Intelligence and Public Standards: report. Lord Evans of Weardale 
KCB DL. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/artificial-intelligence-and-public-standards-report  
UK-CDEI (2020). Review into bi as in algorithmic decision -making. Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/957259/Review_into
_bias_in_algorithmic_decision-making.pdf  
UK-CQC (2020). Using machine learning in diagnostic services. UK's Care Quality Commission. Avaia lble at: 
https://www.cqc.org.uk/sites/default/files/20200324%20CQC%20sandbox%20report_machine%20learning%20in%20diagn
ostic%20services.pdf  
US-DOD (2020). DOD Adopts Ethical Principles for Artificial Intelligence. Available at: 
https://www.defense.gov/Newsroom/Releases/Release/Article/2091996/dod-adopts-ethical-principles-for-artificial-
intelligence/  
Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., & Russell, C. (2017). Counterfactual explanations without opening the  black box: Automated 
decisions and the GDPR. Harv. JL & Tech., 31, 841. 
Wood, S. N. (2017). Generalized additive models: an introduction with R. Chapman and Hall/CRC. 
Zafar, M. B., Valera, I., Gomez -Rodriguez, M., & Gummadi, K. P. (2019). Fairness Constraints: A Flexible Approach for Fair 
Classification. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 20(75), 1-42. 
Zemel, R., Wu, Y., Swersky, K., Pitassi, T., & Dwork, C. (2013, February). Learning fair representations. In International 
Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 325-333). 
Zhang, B. H., Lemoine, B., & M itchell, M. (2018, December). Mitigating unwanted biases with adversarial learning. In 
Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society (pp. 335-340). 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3889612